want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explained well
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits have rolled this time we're
looking at the 2018 film first reformed
written and directed by Paul Schrader
and starring Ethan Hawke as Reverend
Ernst tala this slow-burning
psychological drama chronicles Tyler's
struggles as the Reverend of the First
Reformed Church in snow bridge New York
as it approaches its 250th anniversary
celebration tala is an alcoholic still
grieving over the death of his son who
enlisted in the military at his father's
suggestion and we also learn as the film
progresses that tala has stomach cancer
amidst all of his personal turmoil tala
is approached by one of his church go
was Mary who's concerned about her
husband Michael who doesn't want to
bring their unborn child into the world
over his fears of climate change
Halle agrees to meet with Michael and
attempts to counsel him on his anxieties
however Mary finds a suicide vest that
Michael had hidden and contacts taller
who swiftly takes it into his possession
and instructs her to tell no one before
Tola has a chance to meet Michael again
he commits suicide taular begins to look
into the climate change that Michael was
obsessed with and oversees the funeral
which is held under Michael's wishes by
a local toxic waste dump at this point
the megachurch
abundant life steps in to tell Tala that
this political statement was not
appreciated and he begins to realize
that abundant life which also owns first
performed have interests and ties to a
corporation that pollutes and as taller
becomes more disillusioned with the
people he works under and with the
growing belief inside him that Michael
was right to be so radically passionate
about environmentalism he begins to
subscribe to the same point of view and
becomes an activist which leads to Tala
apparently
planning to use Michael's suicide vest
to blow himself up at the 250th
anniversary gathering at First Reformed
thus executing the higher-ups at
abundant life as taller struggles
throughout the entire film with an
overbearing sense of loss whether it's
the loss of his family the loss of his
beliefs and convictions or whether it's
the loss of hope he finds one glimmer of
potential salvation in Mary they become
quite close after Michaels suicide with
Tala providing a lot of support to Mary
but nothing sexual happens between the
two before the anniversary celebration
Tala urges Mary not to attend knowing
what he's planning to do as the church
fills up Tala equips his suicide vest
and to his horror he spots Mary arriving
in a panic he abandons his bombing plot
and resorts to his presumable back-up
plan
wrapping himself in barbed wire and
preparing to drink drain cleaner but
Mary interrupts his suicide and the film
reaches its conclusion
[Music]
I have blessed peace with my lord so
leaning on the everlasting arms leaning
safe and secure from all wars leaning
leaning leaning on the everlasting arms
[Music]
leaning
me
name
on the everlasting
[Music]
so it seems fairly clear cuts Mary comes
to taller and enables his salvation with
the religious backdrop of the story it's
hard not to think of Mary in terms of
the Virgin Mary the mother of God and at
this point an expectant mother without a
biological father perhaps this is a
divine intervention a force of God that
steps in to prevent taular from
committing his final sin or maybe it's
just a love that has grown between the
two climaxing with mary's arrival to
embrace him the third option is that
this moment never happened that tala is
imagining this moments are too good to
be true ending to his despair a few
things that support this idea are that
Mary doesn't seem too perturbed by the
fact that she's walking in on tala about
to drink a lethal dose of drain cleaner
you could argue that she's too far away
to see the substance and as a glance it
could just be an alcoholic drink but
there's also the bloodstains on his robe
which go unremarked by her as they
embrace his body is also wrapped in
barbed wire and while his robe is
covering this she would be able to feel
it through the cloth and potentially be
hurt and scratched by it is this Tallis
dying dream as he lays choking to death
on the floor an imagined fairytale
Savior to his downward descent that
takes him from a man about to commit
mass murder to a reformed man welcomed
by love once more it would be all too
easy to say that the ending is of course
meant to be taken at face value in a
film so clear-cut and realistic why
would there suddenly be an introduction
of a fantasy sequence at the end which
is where the scene between tala and Mary
earlier on in the film comes into play
Mary visits taller and tells him how her
husband used to let her lie on top of
him as a form of intimacy and Salah
obliges to perform the same ritual with
Mary she lies on top of him and then
this happens
they begin to levitate together and then
eventually they pass over various
landscapes in a hypnotic and mesmerizing
sequence that literally flies in the
face of the cold realism the previous 18
minutes of the film had established
could this be the key to showing us that
in this film a transcendental realm
exists writer director Paul Schrader
spoke of this particular sequence in
relation to its finale saying I knew at
the end I wanted to jump out of the
world and I thought I should prefigure
that in some way and I just kept
thinking what would Tarkovsky do well
he'd levitate and Ray Tarkovsky was a
Russian filmmaker whose films often
dealt in the metaphysical and in the
spiritual the levitation scene could
simply be a form of magic realism in the
film depicting the emotional bond that
is forming between Mary and tala sparked
by and in tune with their physical
intimacy it could also be representative
of tolas newfound interest in the
environments looking at the landscapes
in which they fly across another element
of the ending is the way in which the
scene is filmed throughout the entire
movie Schrader uses static shots the
camera moves very little he was actually
inspired by the 2013 masterpiece EDA by
Polish filmmaker Pavel pavlikov scheme
which similarly tells its story through
beautifully framed static shots composed
in a 4 by 3 ratio and similarly to
either the last moment of first reformed
lets the camera free as the frame whirls
around Marion Tala in the celebratory
moments the releasing of attention
between the two expressed in the camera
breaking free from its rigid and
clinical view capturing their embrace in
a flowing freeing motion yet you could
also read this as a sign that the truth
of first reformed lies in its realistic
depiction of its events and that the
camera circling Marion Tala represents a
fantasy as does the dreamy levitation
sequence that also looks nothing like
the rest of the film there really isn't
a strong argument to be made for the
ending of first reformed being real or
fantasy and that was entirely by design
here's a snippet of Paul Schrader in
discussion with filmmaker
Sofia Coppola touching on the ending of
the film I don't know what the ending is
yeah it can be read and one on either at
one of two ways well one is it sort of
miracle has occurred it is slight
disparity the other is equally my sense
optimistic which is he drinks the Drano
and he's on all fours he's throwing up
his stomach he's imagine and God comes
over to him who has not talked to him
for the whole movie and says Reverend
told you want to know what happens and
looks like here it is this is exactly
what it looks like it looks like one
long kids
yeah we've been tweaking it in the
editing you know when people see it
trying to get trying to make it like
half and half so whenever I showed it I
say is he alive or dead but it's trying
to get about the same amount of hams to
go out for both do you have an idea
which side it's more honor no whenever
people more people thought it was one
way I shipped the editing to it's the
other way so that so that I didn't know
now the most interesting part of that
for me is where Schrader mentions that
he wants the general consensus over
whether or not Salah is a live war debt
by the end of the film to be completely
split in the audience he even wants it
to be so 5050 that he doesn't even know
himself so how do you read it we'd love
to hear your thoughts and discuss this
great film further for me I don't know
and that's kind of the way I like it
I would ask all about the ending of the
movie when we weren't working on it and
he would say that a good film begins as
you walk out of the theater meaning that
the movie should really function like
the ringing of a bell the Bell is wrong
and now it vibrates that's the sound
that gets carried you know and the
significance of a film is its impact is
what at what stays with you
[Music]
you